Dvorak was born on September 8, 1841, in the Bohemian village of Nelahozeves,
near Prague (then part of Bohemia in the Austrian Empire, now in the Czech
Republic), where he spent most of his life. He was baptized as a Roman
Catholic in the church of St. Andrew in the village. Dvorak's years in
Nelahozeves nurtured the strong Christian faith and love for his Bohemian
heritage which so strongly influenced his music. His father Frantisek
Dvorak (1814–1894) was an innkeeper, professional player of the zither, and a
butcher. Although his father wanted him to be a butcher as well, Dvorak went
on to pursue a future in music. He received his earliest musical education at
the village school which he entered in 1847, aged six. From 1857 to 1859 he
studied music in Prague's only organ school, and gradually developed into an
accomplished player of the violin and the viola. He wrote his first string
quartet when he was twenty years old, two years after graduating.
Throughout the 1860s he played viola in the Bohemian Provisional Theater
Orchestra, which from 1866 was conducted by Bedřich Smetana. By the time he
was eighteen years old, Dvorak was a full-time musician. He was making about
$7.50 a month. The constant need to supplement his income pushed him to teach
piano lessons. It was through these piano lessons that he met his wife. He
originally fell in love with his pupil Josefína Čermáková, for whom he
composed Cypress Trees. However, she never returned his love and ended up
marrying another man. In 1873 Dvorak married Josefina's younger sister, Anna.
They had nine children together, three of whom died during infancy.

